# Project Rationale

## Why we want to do this

The primary goals of the BPC are to provide resources to research groups 
interested in the improvement of cattle genomics resources, and to provide a 
forum for discussing the creation of high-quality genome assemblies of cattle 
breeds to foster collaboration and to prevent duplication of effort where it is 
not beneficial. Our guiding principle is that open discussion of ongoing and 
proposed projects will enhance efficient use of limited global cattle genomics 
resources and reduce unhelpful competition between projects. In part this is 
purely selfish in the sense that we intend to develop a pangenome resource but 
want to maximize impact by focusing on breeds or species that don’t already have
resources to develop reference-quality genome assemblies. Below we discuss what 
resources we plan to contribute, how we think they can be useful, and who we 
anticipate can benefit from them either directly or indirectly. We begin with a 
brief overview from our perspective of the successes of animal agriculture.

## Improvements in Livestock Breeding Fuel Food Production

Many of the existing breeds of cattle can trace their origins to only a handful 
of centuries in the recent past! Most breeds were developed in specific 
geographic locations around the world, and were specialized for milk, meat or 
draft animal production based on the needs of the surrounding landowners. Many 
of the farmers that raised livestock in these times practiced early forms of 
selective breeding by choosing mating pairs of cattle that had higher 
performance than their peers in the herd. It wasn’t until the turn of the 
twentieth century that animal breeding was turned into a mathematical science by
the calculation of “values” for each parent. This resulted in large gains for 
milk and meat production in specific breeds of cattle.Modern animal breeding.

### Modern animal breeding

Modern animal breeding has benefited from several key innovations, including:

1. Artificial insemination: allowing high performance bulls to contribute their 
genetic material to the population at a faster rate.

2. Computer algorithms: which calculate “breeding values” for each animal to 
allow for targeted matings.

3. Genotyping chips: that can measure the genetic “relatedness” of animals in a 
rapid fashion so that farmers can best decide how the animal should be bred, 
or if the animal should remain in the herd.

The latter innovation of using animal genotypes has been the most recent 
development to benefit cattle dairy and beef production systems. By targeting
specific DNA bases in the cattle genome that tend to be variable, geneticists 
can approximate a cow’s/bull’s full genome sequence and use that information to 
determine how closely related they are to high performers on a national level. 
In dairy systems, a farmer can now assess the potential lifetime production of a
calf only weeks after she is born just by taking an ear punch tissue sample and 
sending it to a genetics lab. This is of critical importance to the producer, as
raising a calf is a two-year investment! If she ends up costing the producer 
more than she produces in product, that can make a difference between 
profitability and bankruptcy.

### The cattle genome sequence

In order to track these variable DNA bases, scientists first needed to find out 
where they were located across the cattle genome. This is why a large 
collaboration was formed in 2004 to sequence 
[the cattle genome](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/324/5926/522.full) 
and make it available to the public. Due to limitations in technology at the 
time, scientists had to select one animal of one breed to be the “reference cow”
for the future genetic map. This cow, L1 Dominette, was from a famous 
[line of Hereford cattle](https://agresearchmag.ars.usda.gov/2010/mar/hereford/)
that was highly inbred. This feature made her a natural fit for 
the genome sequencing strategy at the time, as inbred individuals were easier to
assemble into genomes.

However, this also meant that all comparisons of subsequently sequenced cattle 
would be against a reference to the Hereford breed’s genome. Any novel sequence 
in another breed’s genome would be difficult to identify on the map, and 
likewise, any Hereford-specific DNA would look like a big deletion of sequence. 
This presents a bigger problem when the DNA from 
[Zebu cattle subspecies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zebu), or 
other distantly related Bovids, are aligned to the current cattle genome.

It is becoming increasingly clear that – while Dominette’s genome has served us 
well to this point – her genome sequence isn’t representative of the breadth of 
diversity of all cattle in the world. A resource that would encompass all the
variation and possible DNA sequence of cattle breeds and bovid species would be 
termed a [Pan-Genome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pan-genome).

## What resources are we looking to develop?

Our primary products are 
[reference genomes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reference_genome) for popular 
cattle breeds. We define a reference genome as a representative, high quality 
“map” of the total DNA of an individual of that breed, that will be available 
for public use by the research community.

For this project, we want to sequence and assemble representative genome 
assemblies of many major cattle breeds that are in use in animal production 
systems throughout the world. We plan to use new 
[DNA sequencing technologies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third-generation_sequencing)
and improved [sequencing strategies](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4277) 
to generate high quality reference genomes for these breeds.

## Why are these resources useful?

One result of the success of modern genetics is that some breeds of specialized 
cattle have become much more numerous than other historical breeds. While 
overall production may be increased by this specialization and concentration, 
the concomitant decrease of overall diversity in the global population may 
result in the loss of alleles that might someday be important for further 
genetic advancement or disease/parasite tolerance. Moreover, the continued 
sequencing of new cattle samples throughout the world has revealed deficiencies 
in using only one cattle breed as a reference animal, as up to 2% of the genome 
sequence of certain individuals may not be present on the cattle reference 
genome. While this missing sequence is not guaranteed to impact animal 
production in all cases, it may hide genes that give certain breeds their 
distinguishing characteristics or improve their production. By creating new 
reference genomes for these breeds, we could track these new genes for potential
production improvements, while identifying breeds with unique alleles to support
conservation efforts.

If we achieve only a 2% improvement in production efficiency per year by 
tracking these new sites, that will result in a doubling of production within a 
36-year time-frame.

## Who will benefit from these resources?

At the present stage of the project, we are seeking members of the cattle 
research community that have samples from breeds of interest, but lack the 
resources to translate those samples into reference-quality genome assemblies.

As such, our primary stakeholders are the members of the cattle research 
community themselves, as our assemblies will benefit current and future research
into the major cattle breeds. Just as the 2009 cattle reference genome 
publication spurned a new era in cattle genomics research, we hope that our 
reference assemblies will greatly benefit future research in cattle.

Ultimately, our hope is that these research results will translate into 
functional improvements that can be used by the international cattle industry by
enabling better targeted genomic selection. If farmers can more rapidly identify
high-performing animals and mate them to other high-performers, this will 
greatly increase the rate of genetic improvement of cattle, in general.

It is also possible that our new references could uncover genome regions related
to methane emissions, and alleles contributing to aspects of sustainability such
as improving ability to use low-quality forage, tolerating drought or parasites,
or enhancing reproductive capacity. By reducing emissions and improving the 
sustainability of cattle livestock systems, we can ensure that producers remain 
competitive in a changing global environment.